Today's reading is from John 6 starting at verse 1.
Sometime after this, Jesus crossed to the far shore of the Sea of Galilee, and a great crowd of people followed him because they saw the signs he had performed by healing the sick.
Then Jesus went up on the mountainside and sat down with his disciples.
The Jewish Passover Festival
was near.
When Jesus looked up and saw a great crowd coming towards him, he said to Philip, where shall we buy bread for these people to eat?
He asked this only to test him, for he already had in mind what he was going to do.
Philip answered him, it would take more than a half a year's wage to buy enough bread for each one to have a bite.
Another of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother spoke up.
Here is a boy with five small barley loaves and two small fish.
But how far will they go among so many?
Jesus said, have the people sit down?
There was plenty of grass in that place.
And they sat down.
Jesus then took the loaves, gave thanks.
and distributed to those who were seated.
As much as they wanted, he did the same with the fish.
When they had had all enough to eat, he said to his disciples, gather the pieces that are left over.
Let nothing be wasted.
So they gathered them and filled 12 baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten.
After the people saw the sign, Jesus performed.
They began to say, surely this is the prophet who is to come into the world.
This is the word of the Lord.
Good morning, foothills.
Great to be with you.
You know, whether it was the minus 28,
or the December 28th, or the 28 people you might have staying in your home this time of year, you had reasons to not be here that were pretty valid.
And thank you for being here.
You know, this message I feel like God put on my heart actually months ago, so I'm very excited to share it.
One of the first jobs that I ever had as a young man was working for college pro painting.
Now, some of you I've painted your home since, so I've learned a few things here and there along the way.
But when I started this job, a college pro, you have workers who are under regional supervisors.
And our regional supervisor came to me as a worker and said, I've got a plan for how this summer's gonna go.
We're gonna do all these quotes across all these towns in the area and we're gonna make this much money.
And as workers, we thought, yes, we're gonna buy in.
Your plan is going to become our purpose and we're gonna work hard.
So we got assigned our very first job
a century home with all kinds of windows that had these huge wooden shutters.
And our job was to paint these wooden shutters with oil-based green paint.
Now, when you're setting out in College Pro to make a lot of money in the summer, it would be safe to say that the objective is expediency and cost-cutting, not so much training.
So the owner of the home comes out on our first day, and he strikes up a conversation with us.
And he says, so what college do you guys go to?
And we said, well, actually, the two of us are in grade 12.
He said, well, how much experience do you have?
We said, this is our first job.
So with his confidence completely shaken, he said, so you're not really college pros.
You're more like high school amateurs.
And we proved him exactly right because on that first day, we grabbed the garden hose to wash the oil-based paint off our brushes and promptly stained his driveway green with the runoff.
Let me tell you all the profit that our supervisor thought we would make that summer just got dissolved right then and there.
Our supervisor might have had plans and we as workers might have said those plans will become our purpose, but we were out of our depth.
Today, we're exploring this story from the Bible where Jesus had his plans and his plans had become the disciples' purpose, but they find themselves out of their depth.
It's the final Sunday of 2025.
You might be aware.
The New Year's right around the corner, and this often brings a mix of emotions for all kinds of people, for all kinds of reasons.
Maybe we're looking back and we're reflecting with gratitude, because amazing things happened in 2025.
Maybe we experienced loss and so we're grieving.
Some of us might be looking forward to 2026 with great excitement and anticipation.
Others might feel very overwhelmed of what the new year will hold.
And some will feel rested as you arrive at a new year.
Others will feel a sense of exhaustion from parenting or work or uncertain to you or the pressures of life.
You see, the new year has this unique way
of revealing how the previous 365 days has gotten the better of us.
It's one of the reasons why we make resolutions about how the next year's gonna be different.
And as a church, you could say that we are actually about to make some New Year's resolutions ourselves because we're wrapping up our year of discernment.
And in January, Pastor Kyle is going to bring a teaching series where we begin to unveil
God's vision, mission, and values to guide our church into the future.
And this too can bring some mixed emotions, can't it?
For some of us, it's excitement and optimism of what God has in store.
For others, we might look at it and feel this sense of our own limitations, or even the doubts that we bring to the table.
And today's text is this famous story of Jesus feeding 5,000 people.
And it too is a story of mixed emotions.
It's where the disciples excitement from their first ministry journey comes up against their sense of limitations and exhaustion.
And this is where Jesus ministers to them.
And he works amidst all of this to reveal his plans.
This is a story where God's plans become his people's purpose.
And that's what we're going to look at today.
And as we do, a little bit of a road map for our time together is we're going to find that when God's plans become his people's purpose, the spent are sustained.
The problem meets perspective and the meager gets multiplied.
Let's pray.
Jesus, as we open your word today together, would you open our hearts to receive what you would say to us?
Where we come into today feeling spent, would you sustain us?
And where we feel overwhelmed by problems, would you give us your perspective?
And where we feel like we have so little to offer, would you show us what you can do with a surrendered life?
And for those exploring faith today, Jesus helped them to hear your invitation to a life of purpose according to your will
And to those of us who are following you, help us to be obedient to what you have to say to us today.
We pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Let's take a look at some of the context that surrounds this unique passage of Scripture.
The story of Jesus feeding the 5,000 is actually the only miracle that appears in all four gospels other than the resurrection of Christ.
And all four of the gospel authors capture unique details.
And so as much as John 6 is going to be our primary text today, I'm gonna pull from some of the others as well because it helps to round out the story and give us our applications for today.
So this miracle happens at what you might call a critical juncture or an inflection point in Jesus' earthly ministry.
His fame is spread widely, the crowds are growing rapidly, and opposition from religious leaders
is growing and intensifying and the disciples have just come back from their first being sent out by Jesus to do the work of his ministry.
So the first thing that we actually see in Mark chapter six, where he accounts for this, is that the disciples are tired.
They are spent from this going out around the countryside and serving countless people in the name of Jesus.
Mark tells us that when they arrive at this instance,
they have not even had anything to eat themselves.
So they are physically, emotionally, and spiritually drained at this point.
And now there's a hungry crowd of thousands of people following them around the countryside.
So they're both tired and now overwhelmed by the pressure.
At the same time, John says in chapter six, this important detail.
Jesus already had in mind what he was going to do about this whole situation.
And it's this juxtaposition of Jesus having plans and the disciples having a purpose that makes our application for us today.
And the first thing that we find here is that when God's plans become his people's purpose, the spent are sustained.
When my three daughters were five, three, and one,
Our parents, my parents in law, who happen to be in the room today, graciously gifted us a family Caribbean cruise.
And we got really excited.
We're thinking, let's go be so restful.
We'll be lounging around on the deck all day in the sun.
And as all of your giggling suggests, you're on to what I'm getting at with a five, three, and one year old.
It was not what we thought it would be.
For these reasons,
Two of our two youngest daughters weren't old enough for the onboard childcare, so off-ship excursions out of the question, and my wife and I had a bedtime now of 7 p.m. That's when we had to be in our cabin.
What's more, our baby wasn't allowed in any of the pools, and all the doors open automatically for our walking three and five-year-olds.
So we are constantly doing split defense parenting, head on a swivel all the time, and to top it all off.
It seemed that every single person who was on that cruise ship had either never seen or was related to a red head, which meant that every elevator conversation was about my daughter's red hair.
So we were very quickly more exhausted than we had if we had just stayed home.
Why do I say this?
Well, there came a point in this journey where the frustration was real, and I'm sure I was quite grumpy.
I'm sure my wife would attest to it.
But my parents-in-law, without owing us anything and with great understanding and compassion, took the kids for a night and let us have a date night where we could rest and recover our strength.
They sustained us when we were spent
And Jesus, not owing his disciples anything in this text, and without any judgment, sustains his disciples in two ways that we see revealed here.
Mark's account tells us that the disciples had excitedly set out on this mission that Jesus had given them, and they had now returned and they're glorifying God for all that he had done in them and through them, but do in part to the disciples' work
And the expanding of the message of Jesus through the countryside, they are now followed around by this huge crowd that is relentlessly pursuing Jesus.
These are people who have heard about Jesus and they've seen his miraculous signs and they've come seeking what he might have in store for them.
And so the pressure of carrying for all these needy people was getting to the disciples.
They were spent.
But Jesus doesn't rebuke the disciples for their exhaustion.
He doesn't shame them for needing rest here.
Instead, he invites them into solitude and retreat.
He says, come with me by yourselves to a quiet place and get some rest.
For some of us, that's the invitation that we need to hear from Jesus as we head into a new year.
Come and get some rest.
Because this is the counterpoint to the way that many of us tend to live our lives with Jesus.
Myself included.
This is a struggling point for me as well.
Because we're prone to mistakenly attaching our worth and value in the eyes of God to what we can produce for him.
The stuff that we can do for the kingdom.
And this leads us to live lives as though
Following Jesus means endlessly expending ourselves for his purposes, even to the point of some sort of righteous exhaustion.
The problem with this is that Jesus exemplified exactly the opposite.
He would retreat to quiet places to pray and be away from the crowds and be in the presence of his father and leave the demands of life and of people behind.
He prioritized space for mental and physical rest.
And so can I get an amen to taking naps?
Like that's what I'm all about.
I often will tell people I will go away to retreat centers and just have a nap.
And to the glory of God, it's wonderful.
Furthermore, we see in this passage that he invites his followers into these practices too.
So the first way that Jesus sustains his followers is through rest.
And the second,
is through nourishment.
What really caught my attention when I was going through this passage, something that had never caught me before, was how the disciples had been so consumed with the work of ministry that they arrive here, having not even eaten themselves.
They are as famished as the crowd.
And admittedly, I'd never caught that before because I've only ever focused on the lens of what must this miracle have meant for the crowd.
This is a glimpse given to us of what it meant for the disciples, for Jesus' followers.
Jesus miraculously sustained them too, and so abundantly that all 12 of them walk away with personal baskets of leftovers at the end.
But the lesson for the disciples here, and the lesson for us, isn't that Jesus is gonna come through in the clutch with the Snickers bar when you're not yourself?
It's not about physical nourishment here.
This is about a reminder that Jesus is the nourishment for the soul.
And like the disciples in the story, every Christian is called to serve the purposes of God.
As the Holy Spirit transforms us, we actually become people who we want to.
We're thrilled to go out and do the work of ministry on Jesus behalf, but we do so in a world where the pressure of need is always there.
It will always demand of our time and our resources and our energy and of our mental and physical well-being and not to mention the spiritual warfare attached to it.
Jesus knew that more often than not, it would not be our stomachs that grow hungry from the work of ministry
And he invites us into the life-giving rhythms of rest and into a reminder of his all-sufficiency.
Because when his plans become our purpose, it's our souls that most need nourishment.
And maybe you're a follower of Jesus.
And you've come here today and you've walked into the church feeling spent from a year's worth of
ministry, and the demands of life, and high output caring for the needs of others, your family, even yourself.
And as you look to the year ahead, you need that reminder that when God's plans become your purpose, the spend are sustained.
On the other hand, maybe
You've entered our doors here today, or you're joining us online, and you can't relate at all to the disciples in the story, but you can relate to the crowd.
There's a spiritual hunger that you are experiencing.
And you've heard stories, or you've seen something different in the life of a Christian, or you've caught a glimpse of what Jesus can do.
And you've come saying, I wonder what he has for me.
what Jesus has for you is spiritual nourishment, the likes of which you can't imagine, to satisfy every of your spiritual needs, the desires of your soul.
And so if that's you today, you've come to the right person.
And my encouragement to you, will you receive what he has to offer you?
The second point that we can take away from this text is that when God's plans become his people's purpose, the problem meets perspective.
I love telling this story, a friend of mine.
He once tried to save some money by doing his own break job on his car.
Some of you immediately are relating to this story for a better or for worse.
And I can as well.
So here's how this story went for him.
He got the tire off, he got the brake caliper off, but then he quickly discovered that his
Brake rotor was so rusted, it was as though it had been welded on.
So he reassembled everything on his car and he drove to the store and he bought some penetrating oil thinking if I spray this on, that's gonna loosen it, it'll work.
Didn't work.
So he did some research, reassembled his car again, drove to the store a second time, purchased a torch thinking heat's gonna get this thing off.
It didn't.
Then came the hammer, brute force, okay?
He is hammering away at the brake rotor.
Now he's damaged it so badly that he can't drive back to the store, has to borrow a friend's car, drives back to the store a third time to purchase a sledgehammer, comes back to his garage, is wailing on this thing until soon pieces of brake rotor are all over his garage.
And finally in great dismay, four hours in to the first wheel of this brake job, he calls up a friend and his friend comes over and he takes a look at the situation.
And he says, would anyone in this situation would simultaneously love and hate to hear?
Well, there's your problem.
You see, hidden under the rust were these two little things called retaining screws that once removed, the rotor just slid right off.
Perspective.
The problem just needed a little perspective.
And the disciples in this story, they saw the problem.
and they needed a divine perspective from Jesus.
You see, they were secluded in the wilderness, and they made a point of mentioning this, and it's late in the day, and the disciples suggested Jesus.
The best solution right now, just send this crowd away, Jesus.
But Jesus says to them something very interesting in Mark 6.
He says, you give them something to eat.
And in John 6 it records that he says to Philip, where shall we buy bread for all of these people?
And Philip protests, obviously.
He says it would take more than half a year's wages to buy this much bread to give everyone even one bite.
And so the understandably stunned disciples agree that the best course of action is actually Jesus.
Let's send them to all the towns throughout the countryside where they can buy their own bread.
We certainly can't afford to do this.
Besides the obvious, I had to ask this question of this text, why is it that suddenly now, after having just returned from their missionary journey, after having been used by God to heal sick people and cast out demons and work miracles in Jesus' name, when Jesus said, feed some people, the disciples choose that moment to say, whoa, whoa, I can't be used in that kind of a way.
And I think that there's three hang-ups here that the disciples have, which are pretty common hang-ups for all of us.
And they could be summed up this way.
Forgetful, this was a first, and their focus was wrong.
The disciples were forgetful.
This is inescapable from the text, because at this point, in their relationship with Jesus, the disciples must have lost sight of at least some of the things that Jesus had done up to this point.
Because prior to this, they have witnessed him produce a miraculous catch of fish, turn water into wine, calm a storm with his words, heal multiple people, and even raise a dead person, which brings us to the second hangup.
This was the first time they'd ever considered a miracle like this.
And maybe their reluctance was precisely because they'd never seen this miracle before.
Even Jesus hadn't fed thousands of people yet.
And third, their focus was all wrong.
It's evident from every account of the four gospels that the disciples' focus was strictly on the problem.
We're tired, there's too many people, it's a secluded place, it's late in the day, everybody's hungry, and on the limitations of human response to the problem.
Send them away, let them buy their own food.
We can't afford this.
The disciples focus was on the problem and they needed a perspective shift that Jesus was going to bring because Jesus wasn't asking them for logistics and for strategy here, he was cultivating faith.
You see, John tells us he asked this only to test them for Jesus already had in mind what he was going to do.
Jesus was intentionally reshaping the perspective of the disciples into the perspective of God in the situation.
And Jesus had a plan all along, and that's when it became clear to the disciples that Jesus was introducing them to God's perspective.
And this is how Jesus disciples all of us as his people.
He will actually bring us to places where our resources run out.
in order that we would more fully see his perspective on the situation.
As a church, we've been seeking God for our organizational vision, mission, and values that are going to carry us to 2033, 2000 years since the resurrection of Christ.
And next Sunday, as Pastor Kyle begins to just scratch the surface of the audacious vision that God is revealing to us as a church, will we be like the disciples in this story?
Will we forget all that he's done in the 60-year history of this church?
Or will we shrink back from it because we've never seen him do that before?
Or will our focus stay strictly on the human reasons why that's impossible and this is a problem and it won't work?
Or by God's grace, will we embrace God's perspective and trust Him to do the miraculous and do it through us?
Maybe your application is more towards the heart of an individual
What if the problem that you see right now in life, in your family, in your workplace, in the world around you, your relationships, society in general, perhaps even in this church?
What if those problems are actually invitations into God's perspective?
What if the impossibility that you see is the canvas upon which God intends to reveal His plans for you?
Because when God's plan becomes people's purpose, the problem meets perspective.
And maybe as this year comes to its close, the pressures of life have brought you to the end of yourself.
Maybe you've come to realize that your best efforts aren't enough to change your circumstances, much less your eternal destiny.
And the good news is that Jesus already had in mind
what he would do for you.
He lived a sinless life, one that you could never live, and he died to pay the penalty you could never pay, so that God's plans could get realized in your life's purpose, including the plan for your eternal salvation.
Now the final lesson that we can take away from this text is that when God's plans become his people's purpose,
The meager gets multiplied.
Now, 10 years ago, as a youth pastor, I began empowering young people to lead the Alpha course in their high schools.
And if you don't know what the Alpha course is, it's a multi-week course that is an introduction to the Christian faith.
And in the first year of doing this, we had five teams of students launch in five high schools, and we thought that that was pretty miraculous.
And shortly thereafter, a young man came to me and he said, I want to start one in my middle school.
And I had a bunch of problems with this.
You see, the school had never had a Christian club to begin with, so we'd be setting out from scratch.
Middle schools in general are pretty resistant to having any kind of Christian or religious club for that matter.
This young man was only grade eight, and he was a lot like me in middle school.
But Giki, not the most influential, and he was going solo.
It was just him who wanted to do this.
But a few weeks in to him running this course, he came to me and he said,
Can I get some Bibles to hand out to the people coming to my Alpha?
And I said to him, sure, how many did you need?
He said 70.
He had 70 middle schoolers coming through his Alpha.
His meager offering got in multiply.
And that's what we see here in John 6.
John's the only one who captures this interaction with this unnamed little boy.
Andrew enters the narrative, one of the disciples saying, here's this boy with five small barley loaves and two small fish.
And John the author is intentionally capturing just how meager this offering is.
Not only does he say the word small twice, but barley loave, that's the bread of the poor people.
The fish were likely dried and pickled.
This was not some nice salmon fillet.
And the boy goes unnamed because he's seemingly insignificant.
This was not an impressive gift.
It wasn't strategic or scalable.
It wasn't enough.
So Andrew says what all the other disciples are thinking, but how far will this go among so many?
And he reveals the disciples have an underlying assumption.
And it's this, that God's work depends on human adequacy.
And Jesus is about to dismantle.
that assumption entirely.
Jesus doesn't go to the boy and say, we're going to need some more from you, son.
He doesn't belittle this boy for the size of the offering.
He doesn't wait until there is enough.
Jesus receives what is surrendered, and that's where the miracle begins.
The miracle here isn't just provision, it's participation.
Jesus could have created bread out of thin air like that.
He'd proven that much and more at this point in his ministry.
But instead he chose to involve the disciples.
Why?
Because the point of this miracle wasn't just feeding the crowd, it was forming his followers.
The miracle taught the disciples that God does not wait for abundance before He acts, and God delights in obedience more than adequacy, and God's power is revealed precisely where human resources come to their end.
And all four of the Gospels say they all ate and were satisfied.
What the disciples thought was insufficient, what they nearly dismissed,
what seemed pointless even to offer in the first place Jesus multiplied into abundance.
As we step into a new vision as a church, this moment from the story should maybe resonate deeply with those of us who can relate to this unnamed boy in this story.
Maybe we feel like our offering is insufficient and it's pointlessly offered.
because we're spiritually underqualified or we're emotionally drained or we're relationally stretched thin or we're wounded or financial limitations or we're unsure if we've got anything at all that would matter to God.
And Jesus doesn't say to you, come back when you've got more.
He says, bring me your meager offering and watch me multiply it.
beyond your wildest imagination.
So you can bring your little faith.
You can bring your hesitant obedience.
You can bring your small financial gift, your imperfect character, the spiritual gift you think is insignificant in the grand scheme of things, because when God's plans become His people's purpose, the meager
gets multiplied.
This unique and miraculous story, it teaches us something very vital about how God works through his church, which is that God rarely starts with what looks sufficient.
He starts with what is surrendered to him.
The future God is calling foothills into
won't be accomplished by our size or our strength or our strategy.
It's going to be fueled by faithful obedience and surrendered availability and trust in Jesus' sufficiency.
So allow me to put a very practical challenge in front of you.
As we enter a season of a new vision and mission for our church,
we should no longer see pray first events of 20 to 30 people.
Let's see hundreds or the thousands of us gathering to surrender what we have and bring great expectation for how God will work miraculously through us because the miracle is never what we have to offer.
It's what Jesus does with it.
And that's not just true for churches, it's true for lives.
Because the greatest multiplication in this story is not bread in the hands of people, it's grace in the hands of Christ.
So if you're exploring faith and maybe for whatever reason the New Year has brought you to coming to church,
You might feel like you've got nothing of significance to bring to Jesus.
You're not impressive, you're not spiritual.
You would feel like you don't matter to God.
But the miracle of this story reveals that Jesus multiplies what is surrendered to him and he invites you to surrender your life and see it multiplied in its purpose.
He already knows what he intends to do with you.
He already knows the purpose he has for your story.
And he already knows the plans for your eternity.
Will you trust him today?
Will you place your life in his hands?
Will you receive the bread of life that satisfies the hunger of the soul?
Because this miracle does more than talk about filling empty stomachs.
It points to a Savior that fills empty hearts and still does.
Jesus is not only the one who multiplies the bread, he is the bread.
He spoke of himself as the bread of life.
He's the one broken and the one given for us.
He's the one who sustains the spend and who brings perspective to the problem and multiplies our meager offerings.
So as we enter 2026, let's offer him what we have.
Let's trust him for what we don't have and let's step into his purposes together.
Would you join me in prayer?
Jesus, thank you for sustaining the spent and for reshaping our perspective when problems overwhelm us and for multiplying what little we bring.
Would you take our lives, our gifts, our time, our faith, our obedience, and use them for your glorious purposes?
Make our plans your purpose.
For our church, make your vision our calling, and make our heart your pursuit.
In the name of Jesus we pray, amen.